date: 2014-08-23
title: Useful bash commands

These are few of the bash commands I often find
useful:

----

[`z`][z]: Z allows jumping (`cd`) into *frecently
(i.e. frequently and recently)* used directories.
Insted of doing
`cd /home/pratyush/websites/project_name`
each time, I can now simply do `z project_name`.
Z supports tab completion too. **[Link to Z library][z]**.

[z]: https://github.com/rupa/z

----

`ps -u <username> -o pid,rss,command | awk '{print $0}{sum+=$2} END {print "Total", sum/1024, "MB"}'`:
When accessing remote servers using shell, I often need to
check the list of scripts running and the memory
they are consuming. This command does exactly
that. It is a sort of minimal task-manager. I
found this command [here][wf-resource].

[wf-resource]: https://community.webfaction.com/questions/8553/how-to-determine-memory-consumption

----

`php -S localhost:8888 -t .`: Though I am not a
`PHP` fan (anymore), this command serves the
current directory using a live php server. This
comes handy to tryout a local wordpress
installation by just extracting the package.

`python -m SimpleHTTPServer 8080` is a Python
alternative for starting a live server from
current directory to serve the files.

----

`netstat -plunt`: To see which ports are open and
which application is on each one.

----

`du file/path -chs`: du is the disk-utility
command. This command shows the total size of any
directory. `-c` is for total, `-h` is for showing
humanize file sizes and `-s` for showing only the
summary. I often use this command on web-servers
to find the size of file-system caches.

----

`ssh-copy-id user@example.com`: This appends the
public key to the remote-host for password-less
ssh logins.

----

`mysqldump -u username -p --all-databases > alldbs.sql`:
For creating a backup of all the mysql databases.

`mysql -u username -p < alldbs.sql`:
For restoring all the databases from the dump.

Both of the these mysql commands are high on
performance. These come handy for creating a
backup snapshots of databases.

I found these two commands [here][mysql-so].
[mysql-so]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/328922/transfer-mysql-database-to-another-computer/4819610#4819610

----

`ssh -D 31500 user@example.com`: This turns the SSH client into a SOCKS proxy server. It provides me a VPN on the fly. So if a website refuses to open, or is restricted to a particular country, I run this command and then update the proxy settings in Firefox as below:

    1. Enable proxy in firefox.
    2. Enter "127.0.0.1" for "SOCKS Host"
    3. Enter "31500" (or whatever port we chose) for Port.

Full documentation for this trick is available
[here][port-forwarding].

[port-forwarding]: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding#Dynamic_Port_Forwarding

----

`howdoi`: [HowDoI][howdoi] provides answers to
programming questions from command line. Thus
instead of opening a browser and getting
distracted in web, I can now simply type in
something like `howdoi convert csv to namedtuple`
to get the leads.

I usually pass the `-ac` arguments: `-a` provides
the full text of the answer, `-c` enables
colorized output.

[howdoi]: https://github.com/gleitz/howdoi

----

`ab -n 100 -c 10 http://www.example.com`: AB is a
poor man's website performance benchmarking tool. `-c`
specifies the number of concurrent requests and
`-n` specifies the total number of requests to be
sent to a webpage. This comes handy while
migrating websites to new servers or when making
significant frontend changes.

----

`wget "url" -c`: WGET is for downloading files
from command-line. I often find the download speeds
significantly different in browser's built-in
download managers and wget. `-c` enables the
resume support.

----

There are various other *must-know* bash commands
such as `awk`, `uniq`, `head` which are
super-useful in daily work. [Akshay][data-tutorial] has covered
them in a [brief tutorial here][data-tutorial].

[data-tutorial]: http://datavu.blogspot.in/2014/08/useful-unix-commands-for-exploring-data.html
